The <a href="http://www.poynter.org/news/mediawire/342345/inside-the-upcoming-life-sciences-newsroom-from-boston-globe-media/">Boston Globe's life sciences initiative</a> led by former Politico editor Rick Berke now finally has a name. They want you read their news urgently, hence - Stat. 

Life-sciences news that carries with it the potential for actual life-changing information? Now that qualifies as urgent.

The company acquired the domain www.statnews.com on Thursday. Burke later made it official by making an announcement in a staff meeting on Friday.

“We take you inside science labs and hospital wards, biotech boardrooms and political backrooms,” Stat’s mission statement reads. "Stat will examine controversies, introduce power brokers, puncture hype and hold accountable those who would deceive the public," it continues.

Other key people at Stat's leadership include Gideon Gil as the Managing Editor of Enterprise and Partnerships and Jeff DelViscio as the Senior Editor of Multimedia and Creative. While Gil was the former Health and Science editor of The Globe, DelViscio was a web producer on the science and environment desk of The New York Times.

While Stat is still hush-hush on who they have been hiring and a lot of them have been reporters, Burke said that once the word is out, there will be many names that people will recognize. 

The company is also looking to hire people for at least six senior positions for the Stat Multimedia Team - with DelViscio's ambition to bring in video, photo and interactive content within the initiative's storytelling stream. These jobs include a video editor, an interactives editor and a social media editor. DelViscio, aims at a integrating a full-stack multimedia team in the newsroom, bringing in multimedia and interactive elements from the very beginning of the process, possibly every single time. 

"It is also a question of what constitutes a multimedia element. Often something as simple as a GIF can have a little impact on the story, in sort of a teaching mentality," said DelViscio. "There is a visual quality to the life sciences that is often not utilized," he added.

The initiative can be expected to feature both micro and macro forms of video. Be it shareable short clips that are focused towards social, or mini documentary style, the project comes with a lot of ambition in the video space. With the interactives editor, the aim is to explore data visualization and the potential on that side right from the start.

"At its core, Stat is supposed to be a watchdog. There is so much money in the system and people are looking at it consistently. That is the huge part of our mission. Although we are at a nascent stage right now, the possibilities also include searchable databases for public health information that aren't otherwise readily accessible, something places like ProPublica and Centre for Public Integrity do so well," said DelVisicio.

Although the website doesn't have a launch date yet, the team would start publishing Stat branded content on The Boston Globe to get started in late Summer. They would be working towards building a national audience with that and promotion on social media.

According to Burke, Stat has recruited people in Boston, New York, Washington D.C and the West Coast. "This will eventually be of national scope," he added.

What used to be a formal-looking publisher suite on the third floor of the Boston Globe building, is now being revamped for the Stat with bold color choices. Although the launch date is still several months away, as the team works on creating an office space and with reporters coming in, Burke says it already has the feel of a newsroom.

----

Jeff

0:43 Approach has to be different. I am looking to build a full-stack multi-media initiative. In a lot of old school operations, multimedia can come and often does come at the very end of the reporting pipeline. And it is kind of a service that is added on 

1:49 At Stat, we want multimedia to be a part in the beginning of the reporting process.  So that they are going to be working along *what pure of lines* to create interactive content that is both contextually relevant and also to some extent make a guide and a narrative to bring out of it.

2:27 They are going to be working together to kind of build a story together from the very beginning. 

3:55 Multimedia element possibly every single time.
3:56 But also the concept that what constitutes a multimedia element. Things gonna be different. Could be something as simple as a GIF, something that can have a little impact on the story. In sort of a teaching mentality. There is a visual *quality?* to the life sciences that is so unutilized. 

4:34 It is about humans. but a lot of times it is going to be a lot providing help? The aim is to provide an entry point for people who might otherwise be intimidated by this kind of material.

6:25 Something that contextualizes a story - that could be anything from a view inside an artery, that can sort of scrub through back and forth from the clogged artery. To see and remember 

7:16 Right now working on the structure of the website kind of on the backend. On the CMS side. Design process. 

9:49 Video is a huge part of the business. Micro to Macro video that is very social focused. to Mini Doc sized kind of things. Ambition in the video space.

10:51 Still Lead. Some junior people to support the operation.

11:21 Multiple content producers who can do a bunch of different stuff well so that we can cover our bases. 

11:03 Social lead. Digital designer. Interactives Editor - who is going to deal with data, and sort of kind of ProPublica scheme of things. Scope projects and data viz kind of stuff. 

11:48 News apps. We are building in some engineering know how so once we are past the initial site design we can make sort of ..... and meander in that direction. And part of having an interactive editor is that in the beginning ...

13:47 At its core, Stat is supposed to be a watchdog. There is so much money in the system and people are looking at it consistently. That is the huge part of the 

Searchable databases for public health information that places like ProPublica and Centre for Public Integrity do so well. 

14:41 NYT Science Podcast for 2.5 years right before I came here. So I am an audiophile and looking to interesting things in that space as well. 


----

0:32 Do you have a launch date date?
0:40 We don't have a launch date. We are going to have Stat branded content running in The Globe to get started in late Summer.
1:00 We are having a whole new website designed and created and that's gonna take several months so we don't have a launch date certainly by the end of the year.
1:58 Through social media and other means would be starting to build a national audience.
2:00 It's a variety of what I think would be compelling surprising stories about the world of how medicine and life sciences and w'll have stories not just from Boston, but we have folks in Washington and the West Coast, and New York. This will eventually be of national scope.

4:00 We are building an office space if you come here now you can see we already have the feel of an office. Reporters coming in. We are beginning to have the feel of an excellent newsroom.

5:57 Multimedia is one of our priorities because there is so many opportunities to tell stories in more creative stories than obviously text. We'd like to be on the cutting edge there and hire the staff to do that. We haven't identified all the ways. We wanna be realistic in what we can achieve at the beginning and what we can achieve with are creative and multimedia resources. I don't know how much at the spectrum of service you see it. It is more about just pure memorable storytelling. That is what is more of what we are going for.

7:43 We have been doing a lot of hiring. While we are not ready to announce who we are hiring yet. But what I can tell you is, there will be many names that you will recognize. 

9:46 Bought the domain last night. The editor told the staff in a staff meeting today. 

11:39 Stat or Statum. The original. Lig
Michael Sheehan - in our brainstorming it was his inspiration.

---

Stat: What’s in a name?

By Bob Tedeschi

A hundred and forty years ago, you’d be hard-pressed to conjure a more alarming 

four-letter word than “stat.” Vulgarities might have triggered a pub brawl or flushed 

a socialite’s cheeks, but “stat” was an attention-getter of a different stripe.

 

Take this medication immediately was its message, invariably scrawled as a kind of 

exclamation mark beneath a life-saving prescription of the day.

 

Let’s forget, for the moment, the fact that many such medications were, well, poison. 

Think mercury, or antimony, now used in car batteries. (On the plus side, doctors 

also prescribed cannabis, which, one hopes, took the edge off an antimony 

overdose.)

 

Back to the point: When you saw “stat,” you snapped to attention.

 

It takes a bit of chutzpah to name a digital-age life-sciences publication after a 

buzzword born when leeches still roamed the apothecary. But we’ll be honest: 

We’re coming at this with no small amount of ambition. 

“We take you inside science labs and hospital wards, biotech boardrooms and 

political backrooms,” STAT’s mission statement reads. STAT will, it continues, 

examine controversies, introduce power brokers, puncture hype and hold 

accountable those who would deceive the public.

That’s a lot for any brand name to convey, especially in a publishing world bristling 

with edgy new labels. But “stat” comes with a certain pedigree.

Its first common usage as a medical term appeared in 1875, in William Handsel 

Griffiths’ seminal (or not) text: “Lessons on Prescriptions and the Art of 

Prescribing.” Griffiths, a surgeon and professor in Dublin, tucked “stat” between 

“stet” and “somnus” on a list of jargon used by doctors who, he wrote, suffered from 

“hurry, laziness or ignorance.”

 

Stat: abbreviation of the Latin word “statim,” meaning “immediately.”

Since Griffiths’ day, “stat” has taken on other meanings. The term’s adoption by 

math geeks came in the 1950s, as shorthand for statistics courses. Sportswriters in 

the Nixon-era later dragged the word into the mainstream.

 

The medical "stat" has also been co-opted by the mobile masses, floating in a sea of 

social media shorthand, and usually appearing atop a must-watch video or anything 

else that qualifies for FOMO-related urgency.

 

So. With all of these “stats” occupying such a major chunk of real estate in the media 

landscape of today, it’d be understandable if a new life-sciences publication ceded 

“stat” to the digit-heads and click-baiters.

 

But let’s face it: Despite the meltdowns some people may experience while watching 

a game, or the thrill others may find in sharing goat videos, or identifying a data-

related glitch in, say, an employment report, “stat” rarely rises to the dramatic level 

of “stat.”

 

Take this. Immediately.

 

On the other hand, life-sciences news that carries with it the potential for actual life-

changing information? Now that qualifies as urgent.

 

Stat: “Read this. Immediately.”

 

It may well be just what the doctor ordered.

---

- are you also looking to build news apps? The health industry has been or is it more about enterprise/investigative storytelling

- when can we expect the first story? what kind of stories are in the pipeline?

- how did you conceive the name? who came up with it?

- when did you get the domain?

- how big is the team now

- when do you plan on launching? - stat branded content running in globe late - summer. web design 

- are you hiring? who are you hiring? what kind of people are you looking for?

- Back to the point: When you saw “stat,” you snapped to attention.

. So far, he’s recruited Politico alums Stephanie Simon and David Nather (who will run the D.C. bureau) in addition to New York Times alum Jeff DelViscio and former Harvard Crimson managing editor Rebecca Robbins. Gideon Gil, the health and science editor of the Globe who is currently finishing a Knight Science Journalism Fellowship, will be the publication’s enterprise editor. Angus Macaulay, formerly vice president of marketing and sales at Pace Communications, has already begun as chief revenue officer. Future hires will include a head of product, in addition to reporters, editors and multimedia staffers.

	Smaller scooplets and step-back enterprise pieces will be a part of the publication’s news diet, which will consist of “urgent daily journalism” and “memorable stories that make a difference,” Berke said.

	Berke says the publication hopes to begin by publishing a few stories in The Boston Globe by this fall. He and his team hope to debut a separate site sometime after that, but he did not want to peg the launch to a specific date.